% Google Reader and the Open Web
% Peter Parkanyi
% 15 March 2013

Since Google announced it will be shutting down Reader, Hacker News, Reddit, and
the tech side of Twitter has been outraged. Reader was cool service for the
hard core Internet users, information addicts and journalists.

While lots of people bitch about the shutdown, it is worth noting, that
[apparently](http://gigaom.com/2013/03/13/chris-wetherll-google-reader/) Reader
has always been a [dog](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Growth-share_matrix) of
the company. While the numbers of the userbase might be in the millions, Google
is huge enough not to care and allocate its talented engineers for more
profitable products.

Since the shutdown was announced, we have already seen nice feed readers popping
up, and I'm sure we will see more, possibly done by the same guys. I wouldn't
worry, RSS has a future, one too similar to the present of IRC.

Because however sad it is, RSS will go down the same way IRC did. The IRC
userbase now only consists of veterans and old-school Internet users, but even
some CS graduates don't even know what it is about. Many freshmen don't know
what a turntable is.

I'm not crying for IRC, as it is old and has its problems, but it is still a
fascinating technology. Although it paved the way for many IM implementations we
see today, and was a great step towards a distributed social network if you
will, consumers have already moved on to the centralised social media. Exactly
the market in which Google is trying so hard to be successful, competing with a
bunch of other closed ecosystems. Making its services form a nicely integrated
whole makes sense, since the more time users spend with them, the more they are
exposed to advertising, and the more willing to pay for more storage, premium
add-ons, etcetera. A feed reader is just
[not part](http://www.zdnet.com/sad-to-see-google-reader-go-come-on-folks-its-2013-7000012596/)
of most people's internet life, and doesn't fit in this image.

Although users love these services, it is worth considering the vendor lock-in
we have become exposed to. Both on the
[Internet](https://rachelbythebay.com/w/2013/02/22/mac/), and away from
keyboard, people are getting angry. Well, not too much, but even I was surprised
that I've heard this from some non-techy friends.

We're living in the walled gardens of a handful of digital lifestyle providers,
which are blocking the communication between their users. Microsoft, to gain
traction, teamed up with Facebook for the social part of its side, but I was
annoyed how they force Windows Live on users with Windows 8. Apple is struggling
to make their online services better. I've heard that their between-device sync
works well most of the time, while they aren't really in the social part yet,
and missing out on the online office suite altogether. There are probably some
others that aren't so big, but this is a tendency.

While I'm not saying that competition over cooperation is evil, it's alarming
how hard it is to move from one platform to the other. Moreover, it's highly
improbable that a user might use Gmail as well as Office 365, because of their
unique features and great integration. This concentration of personal
information also allows for great
[profiling](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2013/03/06/1218772110.full.pdf+html),
[targeted advertising](http://www.amazon.com/b?ie=UTF8&node=5160028011), or
[mass](http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-03-08/skypes-been-hijacked-in-china-and-microsoft-is-o-dot-k-dot-with-it)
[surveillance](http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/03/13/us-france-skype-investigation-idUSBRE92C02Q20130313),
or even
[censorship](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/03/04/apple-barely-legal-teens_n_2805882.html). If
you believe you have nothing to hide, you will still be outraged when Twitter or
Netflix goes down, or if your credit card details are
[stolen](http://arstechnica.com/gaming/2011/04/sony-admits-utter-psn-failure-your-personal-data-has-been-stolen/)
from your PlayStation account.

The [unhosted](https://unhosted.org/) movement provides a great alternative
approach towards managing online presence and social networking, but it is still
immature and more of a playing field, rather than something that has developed
its business models. With the importance of JavaScript still in growth, and
turning into a language research area, I expect many developers will pick up the
serverless app design, just like they started making REST APIs for everything
when Hacker News was all about AJAX. The problem will be with hosting that
unhosted data. Laptops, tablets, and smartphones, and whatever
Internet-connected machines should share their otherwise not used resources to
assist their user in having a private online life, but then how do I chat with
Alice? How do I even prove it is her that I am talking to, before actually
talking to her? Also, how can I share a document with Bob if I will be on a
plane by the time he checks? Do we have to pay for service providers,
centralising the whole thing again? Do we have appliances at home, beside or
inside our router, HTPC, or TV?  And, until IPv6 gets widespread, how do we
route and address all this traffic? And how will my News Feed fill up with
amateur food porn and cats of my friends? 

While we have a few answers, we probably have many more questions. For some of
them, RSS or its descendants might prove to be a great answer after all.
